---
epoch: 1765922400
title: Verification of Program Optimisations (Lean)
duration-hours: "4"
tags:
  - stream-lean
---

**VOD:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IcyFhrWyzdg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IcyFhrWyzdg)

# []{.stream-time} <br> Verification of Program Optimisations (Lean)

Work on [https://github.com/l1mey112/bitbasher](https://github.com/l1mey112/bitbasher).

**Agenda.**

- [x] You would probably want to go over what this project is even about before you go those things below. ✅ 2025-12-17
	- [ ] Create blog post on this.

---

- [x] Work on a general theory of `noUb` and `wf` functions, so you can make conversions and rewrites super easy. ✅ 2025-12-17
- [x] The proposition `wf : f poison = poison` only tells you that `f` doesn't observe poison if `f` is nonconstant/doesn't depend on the argument. Though, it usually does depend on the argument so is this really a misname? ✅ 2025-12-17

- [ ] The `wf` argument to `congrApp` shouldn't be passed by the user basically ever. Calculating this should be fast too, it shouldn't use `by simp [simp_iN]`.
```
theorem congrApp {n} (f : iN n → iN n)
    {wf : f poison = poison := by opt_poison_input}
    {a a' : iN n} (h : a ~> a') : f a ~> f a'
```

# Aftermath

- [ ] Infrastructure for `opt` theorems.
	- The above, and for example using a Monad as you traverse terms to ascertain whether or not UB is preserved or not. (This uses a general theory of `noUb`, `wF`, `ubEquiv'`, `ubEquiv`, whatever works.)

- [ ] General typeclasses the different possible ways to raise UB. So for example `x + y` doesn't introduce any MORE UB than it's arguments, but `x +nsw y` does.
	- Generally you could have a theorem relating these typeclasses.

**Proving.**
1. Prove by rewriting based on what you already know (human).
2. Prove by the semantics of the actual program (human).
3. Automatically prove (machine).

At the moment, (1), (3). I guess we need (2).

# Solving (2)

- [ ] Support argument to the conversion `iN_convert_goal_bitvec a b c`, then use simplification lemmas to bring things back down in terms of `BitVec`.
```lean
/-
(h :
  (x ≥ₛ 0) &&& (y ≥ₛ 0) &&& (z ≥ₛ 0) ~> 1 ∨
  (x <ₛ 0) &&& (y <ₛ 0) &&& (z <ₛ 0) ~> 1)
-/
def hyp {n} (a b c : BitVec n) :=
  !(a.sle 0) && !(b.sle 0) && !(c.sle 0) ∨
  (a.slt 0) && (b.slt 0) && (c.slt 0)
```
- When using `iN_convert_goal_bitvec` there should be another SimpSet to further reduce to the definition but don't go further than `BitVec`.
```lean
@[opt ideal]
theorem add_zero {n} (x : iN n) : x + 0 ~> x := by
  iN_convert_goal_bitvec
  /-
  case bitvec
  n : Nat
  a✝ : BitVec n
  ⊢ bitvec a✝ + 0 ~> bitvec a✝
  -/
```
- When doing `simp only [iN_simp]` you end up with the below which isn't really useful because you're not going to the definition. I would want to convert `~> bitvec` to something.
```
⊢ (bitvec a✝).pBind₂ (bitvec 0#n) iN.add? ~> bitvec a✝
```
